README.md, before:

Writable CTE vs Locking
-----------------------

Example (performance, correctness) of using PostgreSQL's writable CTE vs locking (with FOR UPDATE) and blind update (multiple call, without locking). Here, the use case is __only use coupon once for each users, and all data should be properly recorded__

Why?
-----------------------

Sometimes, you want to speed-up your database transaction by reducing the number of calls. Of course, while still being safe. This repo gives an example about how to achieve that.

How to run
-----------------------

1. run `docker-compose -f docker-compose.env.yml` to setup the db
2. run setup.sql before each run
3. run main.py, with one of the following arguments
  * cte ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/writablecte.py))
  * lock ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/normal_style_for_update.py))
  * wolock ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/normal_style_wo_explicit_locking.py))

Details
-----------------------

The **lock** and **wolock** code style's mimic those of ORM's, in which the data is read from db, updated in the apps, then updated back to the db. See ([here](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/ORMStyleCode.py)) for example

The code runs in 10 threads
**cte**: combine all transfer code into 1 sql, resulting in only 1 db-call. Locking benefits from Postgres write-lock. __safe and fast__
```python
cursor.execute("""
  WITH cte AS (
    UPDATE coupons
    SET amount=amount-1
    WHERE code = %s
    RETURNING id
  )
  INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage
  SELECT id, %s
  FROM cte
""", (self.code, user_id))
```

**lock**: using explicit locking (`FOR UPDATE` clause), does multiple db calls. __safe but slow__
```python
cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM coupons WHERE code = %s FOR UPDATE", (self.code, ))
coupon_row = cursor.fetchone()
new_amount = coupon_row['amount'] - 1
coupon_id = coupon_row['id']
cursor.execute("UPDATE coupons SET amount = %s WHERE id = %s", (new_amount, coupon_id))
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage VALUES (%s, %s)", (coupon_id, user_id))
```

**wolock**: blindly checking the database record, do some computation, and then updating the data. __neither safe nor fast__
```python
cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM coupons WHERE code = %s", (self.code, ))
coupon_row = cursor.fetchone()
new_amount = coupon_row['amount'] - 1
coupon_id = coupon_row['id']
cursor.execute("UPDATE coupons SET amount = %s WHERE id = %s", (new_amount, coupon_id))
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage VALUES (%s, %s)", (coupon_id, user_id))
```

Result
-----------------------

All of these numbers are taken at Windows 10 Pro, postgresql 11.2, Core-i7 8550U, 16GB of RAM, 512GB NVMe SSD

**Time result: (all in seconds)**
| run-number/result |   cte   |   lock   |  wolock  |
| ----------------- |:--------|----------|---------:|
| run-1             | 4.40147 | 20.93568 | 11.56369 |
| run-2             | 5.15701 | 21.00785 | 11.78913 |
| run-3             | 4.53813 | 20.90705 | 12.52875 |

**Final coupon count:**
| run-number/result | cte |  lock | wolock |
| ----------------- |:----|-------|-------:|
| run-1             |  0  |   0   |  8746  |
| run-2             |  0  |   0   |  8705  |
| run-3             |  0  |   0   |  8712  |

The main point here is that before optimizing for performance, ensure that your application can give correct results in spite of concurrency, which is common right now.

And if needed (and possible), you can use some of your data store's feature, such as __postgresql's writable cte__ to compensate for performance

Beware of the time result, `wolock` seems fast, but it is prone to __race-condition__, which means `wolock` **SHOULD NOT** be used in production settings

Commit message:

add check if coupons goes negative

README.md, after:

Writable CTE vs Locking
-----------------------

Example (performance, correctness) of using PostgreSQL's writable CTE vs locking (with FOR UPDATE) and blind update (multiple call, without locking). Here, the use case is __only use coupon once for each users, and all data should be properly recorded__

Why?
-----------------------

Sometimes, you want to speed-up your database transaction by reducing the number of calls. Of course, while still being safe. This repo gives an example about how to achieve that.

How to run
-----------------------

1. run `docker-compose -f docker-compose.env.yml` to setup the db
2. run setup.sql before each run
3. run main.py, with one of the following arguments
  * cte ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/writablecte.py))
  * lock ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/normal_style_for_update.py))
  * wolock ([impl](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/normal_style_wo_explicit_locking.py))

Details
-----------------------

The **lock** and **wolock** code style's mimic those of ORM's, in which the data is read from db, updated in the apps, then updated back to the db. See ([here](https://github.com/aarondwi/CTE-vs-Explicit-Locking/blob/master/ORMStyleCode.py)) for example

The code runs in 10 threads
**cte**: combine all transfer code into 1 sql, resulting in only 1 db-call. Locking benefits from Postgres write-lock. __safe and fast__
```python
cursor.execute("""
  WITH cte AS (
    UPDATE coupons
    SET amount=amount-1
    WHERE code = %s
    RETURNING id
  )
  INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage
  SELECT id, %s
  FROM cte
""", (self.code, user_id))
```

**lock**: using explicit locking (`FOR UPDATE` clause), does multiple db calls. __safe but slow__
```python
cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM coupons WHERE code = %s FOR UPDATE", (self.code, ))
coupon_row = cursor.fetchone()
new_amount = coupon_row['amount'] - 1
coupon_id = coupon_row['id']
cursor.execute("UPDATE coupons SET amount = %s WHERE id = %s", (new_amount, coupon_id))
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage VALUES (%s, %s)", (coupon_id, user_id))
```

**wolock**: blindly checking the database record, do some computation, and then updating the data. __neither safe nor fast__
```python
cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM coupons WHERE code = %s", (self.code, ))
coupon_row = cursor.fetchone()
new_amount = coupon_row['amount'] - 1
coupon_id = coupon_row['id']
cursor.execute("UPDATE coupons SET amount = %s WHERE id = %s", (new_amount, coupon_id))
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO user_coupon_usage VALUES (%s, %s)", (coupon_id, user_id))
```

Result
-----------------------

All of these numbers are taken at Windows 10 Pro, postgresql 11.2, Core-i7 8550U, 16GB of RAM, 512GB NVMe SSD

**Time result: (all in seconds)**
| run-number/result |   cte   |   lock   |  wolock  |
| ----------------- |:--------|----------|---------:|
| run-1             | 4.40147 | 20.93568 | 11.56369 |
| run-2             | 5.15701 | 21.00785 | 11.78913 |
| run-3             | 4.53813 | 20.90705 | 12.52875 |

**Final coupon count:**
| run-number/result | cte |  lock | wolock |
| ----------------- |:----|-------|-------:|
| run-1             |  0  |   0   |  8746  |
| run-2             |  0  |   0   |  8705  |
| run-3             |  0  |   0   |  8712  |

As can be seen, the `wolock` doesn't return the correct count for the remaining coupons, which means this is the very example of race-condition's danger. It may seem fast, but **SHOULD NOT** be used in production

The main point here is that before optimizing for performance, ensure that your application can give correct results in spite of concurrency, which is common right now.

And if needed (and possible), you can use some of your data store's feature, such as __postgresql's writable cte__ to compensate for performance. This feature can also delegate the task of checking constraint to db
